Okay, so you're trying to figure out how
to get rid of that vocal harshness that
you're getting in your mix. I'm going to
show you three totally different
techniques in order to try to accomplish
just that. Check this out. Okay, so
first thing we're going to do is listen
to the vocal. Let's take a listen to the
vocal that we have and that we're going
to be using in this particular tutorial.
Check this out.
I don't want to play this game now. I
just don't feel the same.
I don't want to go. I'm seeing a ghost
on the block and I've been waiting here
for you. Okay, a vocal that is far from
perfect. I can hear some of that vocal
harshness. The first technique we're
going to use in order to combat that
harshness is we're going to use dynamic
EQ. I'm pulling up the ProQ4 from Fab
Filter. What is dynamic EQ? Long story
short, a dynamic EQ is basically a
hybrid between an EQ and a compressor.
What you do is you can select exactly
what frequency range you want to quote
unquote compress or attenuate. It works
like this. If I say to myself, at 2 kHz,
I hear that vocal harshness or resonance
that's bothering me, what I can use is a
dynamic EQ. What the dynamic EQ does is
allows me to pinpoint exactly where in
the frequency spectrum that I want to
apply that attenuation. And when it
passes a certain threshold, it will
compress that or attenuate that
particular frequency range. So, we're
going to use dynamic EQ in order to
combat that harshness because it's not
all the time, especially when we do
subtle moments like this. As opposed to
doing loud moments like this, that 2K
frequency is way more prominent and loud
and aggressive when we're loud as
opposed to being down here. So, what I
want to do is opposed to a static cut is
use dynamic EQ to say when that
particular frequency crosses a certain
threshold, calm it down, tame it,
attenuate it, compress it. And that's
what we're going to use dynamic EQ for
because it's not all the time, but it's
just sometimes that that particular
frequency is harsh. Okay, so let's apply
this processing.
First thing we're going to do is
actually find exactly where most of that
harshness for us is bothering us. So I'm
going to just sweep a little bit and
find it. I know to me my ear tells me
it's in that 1k kind of region. So we're
going to do that.
Okay, right here in that 3K range that
is is bothering me a bit. So now what
we're going to do is we're going to use
dynamic EQ on the ProQ4. I hone in on
that spot. And now what I'm going to do
is I'm going to use this part up top to
trigger that dynamic EQ. So let's do
that now.
feel the same. Got me like I don't want
to go. I'm seeing a ghost on the block
and I've been waiting here for you. I
already know I should just let you go.
Part of me feeling like I never let go.
So you could see when it goes into those
more belty moments, it kind of buckles
down on that particular range because
there's an abundance of frequency that
is in that particular spot when I'm
louder. So, it's maintaining the sound
in sonics when I'm quieter and when it
goes to the more belty stuff, it's kind
of saying, "All right, when it goes past
that threshold, I'm going to tame it."
So, before and after without first. And
I don't want to play this game now. I
just don't feel the same. Got me like I
don't want to go. I'm seeing a ghost.
I already know.
So, it's just holding that stuff down
once it passes a certain threshold. A
beautiful thing about this also, and I
feel like gets overlooked with doing
this type of stuff, is also now that
I've kind of gotten this newfound
headroom from just kind of taming
things, I should and can turn this up.
And this allows me to have a louder
vocal in my particular sound and being
able to get my vocal louder because I've
tamed those frequencies that otherwise
would destroy people's ears if they
listen to over long periods of time. So,
within the music, without first. And now
what I'm going to do is I'm going to
raise the actual overall level of this
as well. Now that we're calming and
taming those peaks in that range, we're
gonna turn over the overall good stuff
and bypass this back and forth in
context with music without first.
[Music]
I'm seeing a ghost and I've been waiting
here for you. I already know I should
just let you go. part of me feeling like
I never let go
in control of my mind and soul.
>> So, I'm able to actually get the vocal
just a little bit louder as well now
that I'm kind of taming that peak, those
peaks and stuff like that. I honestly
feel like I can actually turn the vocal
up a bit more with my process signal now
that I've actually tamed it. So, that's
just one way to do it, dynamic EQ. Let's
move on to the next technique or way you
can go about it.
So, the next technique that I have for
you is saturation. And I feel like this
is probably the lesser popular of the
three techniques that I'm going to show
you. And this is using saturation in
order to tame harshness. Now, what I'm
going to do is kind of similar to the
dynamic EQ section or part that I showed
you. I'm going to find that space again
in the vocal sound that I feel like is
giving me that harshness somewhere in
that 1 to 4k uh range. And I'm going to
apply some saturation, specifically tube
saturation. What the tube saturation is
going to give me is, and a lot of times
what I notice is it kind of gives me
this softening of the transient stuff.
It also has a way of feeling like
compression. It's a really nice quote
unquote warm way or warm feeling that it
gives to that particular range, which is
I know is a word that we all kind of
despise a bit. So, I'm going to show you
what adding harmonics from a tube
saturation standpoint can do to the
harshness of the vocal. So, that same
exact technique, I'm going to find out.
I'm gonna turn this way down and I'm
gonna find where that harshness I feel
is kind of coming from for the most
part. So, we're going to solo this. I
know deep down it's coming from this
range, but we're just going to find that
sweep and then we're going to find that
range and hone in on it. I don't want to
play this game now. I just don't feel
the same. Got me like I don't want to
go. I'm seeing a ghost and I've been
waiting here for you. I already know I
should just let you go.
>> So right here feel feel feel feel feel
feel feel feel feel feel feel feel feel
feel feel feel feels a little like nasty
and I'm feeling that harshness stuff
like that. Same thing what we felt in
the dynamic EQ section. Much different
there. Also one thing to note I do enjoy
broader filters as far as the dB per
octave. This defaults in Fat Filter
Saturn to like 24 dB per octave, but I
do prefer the broader filters. sounds
better to me. Just throwing it out there
to you. Whole another tutorial. What I'm
going to do now is I'm going to apply
some of that tube saturation to it. So,
I've selected the warm tube and I'm
going to apply some of that tube
saturation dry right here.
[Music]
I just don't feel
like
the block and I've been waiting for you.
I already know I should just let you go.
Part of me feeling like I never I don't
want to play this game. Now I just don't
feel the same. I don't want to play this
game. Now I just don't feel the same. It
just has this gentle feel to it now. Um
and it kind of just eased it up, but it
feels like this phantom effect because
it's so subtle, but the peaks of that
particular range that were there before
just feel so much smoother and quote
unquote warmer in its presentation. So
let's bypass it back and forth. Take a
listen to this without first.
>> I'm seeing a ghost on the block and I've
been waiting here for you. I already
know I should just let you go.
>> So, it eased up on the edgginess of that
particular spot a bit. Now, be very
careful with this because you can take
out too much of that transient and and
lively feel and leave you with a vocal
that feels just a lot very soft and
plushy. So, be very subtle with this.
But, nonetheless, that technique in
itself, just adding tube saturation to
the range that's giving you that
harshness can really smooth things out,
especially with that peak transient kind
of stuff and kind of smooth those
transients a bit and stuff like that.
So, harmonic saturation, great way to
kind of get rid of or tame vocal
harshness. All right, now let's move on
to the third and final technique that I
have for you. And with this one, it kind
of copies or piggybacks off of the last
one. We're going to use transient
shaping in order to dumb down the
harshness in a vocal. So, kind of
similar to what I was saying as far as
what saturation did for us, which was
softening the transients a bit when it
came to the tube saturation. What if we
literally just used a transient shaper
to dumb down the actual transients of
that harsh region, which you'll notice
that when we take the transients of that
of a specific region and deemphasize it
a bit, it doesn't feel as prominent and
it smooths out the entire sound in
general. Let me show you just what it
sounds like. So, we're going to go to
that same range. I know that that range
is about right here, 3.2 kHz. Let's
listen to this range right quick.
[Music]
Now I just don't feel the same.
>> Cool. So right there is where I'm
feeling that harshness and stuff like
that. And what we're going to do is with
split EQ, split EQ allows me to affect
the transient information different from
the tone of the actual information. So
what I'm going to do is I'm going to
grab the transient part of the split EQ
and I'm going to deemphasize the
transient of that particular range. So
check this out. Let's deemphasize the
transients of this range. I'm soloing
the band as well.
And I don't want to play this game now.
I just don't feel the same.
I don't want to go.
And I've been waiting here for you. I
already know I should just let you go.
>> Smooths out that range in particular.
Now, let's hear that with the full
spectrum of the vocal. Now, granted, I
am exaggerating the effect just so you
can hear it on whatever you're listening
to it. for the purpose of the tutorial.
Bypass back and forth without first.
I'm seeing a ghost on the block and I've
been waiting here for you. I already
know I should just let you go.
So, it just feels a bit smoother. Now
granted, be very careful with this, but
it does make that range just feel a
little bit smoother by us deemphasizing
the transient information in that
particular place. And thus, I am able to
now I can turn over up the overall
volume of the vocal because that
particular range isn't poking out as
much as it did before. So, those are
three really simple, to be honest with
you, techniques that sometimes I employ
to get rid of vocal harshness. There's a
thousand different ways to do it from
DSers and all kinds of cool ways,
surgical EQ, but I just wanted to put
your ear on three different ones. I
also, just as a bonus, want to bring up
that using this on high-end to smooth
out high-end as far as the split EQ and
kind of softening the transients is
powerful, too. You can take this and
basically calm some of that high-end um
uh transient stuff that's up there, and
it really has a nice sound of smoothing
out the high-end as well. So, three
powerful techniques. use them uh however
you want. And then let me know in the
comment section below what are some
other techniques that you uh have also
seen or used to kind of combat vocal
harshness and stuff like that. I hope it
helps. Please make sure you comment,
subscribe, like, and the whole nine. And
if you have any videos that you would
like me to make next, please let me know
in the comment section below. Also,
become a member. We really appreciate
it. It really helps to keep this channel
going. and also visit helpvon.com at any
time to um get you some goodies, some
plugins, bypass, a bunch of our really
cool stuff that we have in the store. I
hope that helped and um until next time
y'all.